---
layout: post
title: Craft brewing vs. enterprise software development
date: 2014-04-27
---
This weekend my wife and I celebrated the birthday of a great friend at the [Jester King brewery](http://jesterkingbrewery.com) outside of Austin. It was a beautiful day, one of those days that tempts you to sell everything to buy land out in the Hill Country. Close friends, a beautiful scene, and amazing beer. But it was more—it was also an inspiring day.

Jester King is a farmhouse brewery—the only authentic farmhouse brewery in Texas. They focus on brewing in the traditional manner of Belgian and French farmers. Farmhouse style ales originated as refreshing summer drinks for the workers in the fields. Due to the agrarian origins of the style, these beers tend to be less refined and consistent than the abbey-style beers, and certainly more varied than today's modern industrial beers. [The saison is a good  example of this style](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Saison#History).

These beers tend to have the characteristic Belgian "funk" due to higher fermentation temperatures, common use of wild yeast, and the "infection" of the beers with bacterias that produce lactic acid. As a result the style is hard to pin down, and can cross the lines of many traditional styles.

At Jester King on Saturday we tried sour stouts, funky pale ales, acidic fruity saisons. This style of brewing is right up my alley, so I was in beer paradise, although some of our friends did not enjoy the sour funk quite as much.

Since that visit I've been thinking about craft brewing, industrial vs. farmhouse methods, and software development. Odd combo you say? As a programmer who has worked in all phases of software development in a large enterprise for over 10 years, I think there are many parallels with the dichotomy between craft vs. industrial brewing and enterprise vs. independent software development.

* *Standardized, consistent product vs. Varying blends based on small batches.* At Jester King they do not aim to produce exactly the same beer every time. They do not follow the exact same recipe or techniques for each beer and batch.  The temperature and seasonal differences affect each batch. This produces varying results, but this is exactly what they want. They aim to improve through experimentation and a laid back approach. That's certainly not how Anheuser-Busch approaches it. This is a direct parallel to the different approaches of large scale, highly bureaucratized enterprise software development and small independent shops. Small batch software certainly carries it's own quirks and opinions, far more than mass market products do
* *Taste and style aimed for the wide middle of the market vs. Small market focus to reflect the tastes of the brewers.* One of the first things the brewer at Jester King said on the tour was that they only brew what they want to drink, then sell what's left over. In a phrase familiar to developers everywhere, their products aim to scratch their own itch. Contrast that with the big industrial brewers who specifically target a broad taste profile for their beers that can be reproduced consistently, at a low cost, and appeal to the widest possible market. Look at developers like [Brett Terpstra](http://brettterpstra.com) or [Brent Simmons](http://inessential.com) vs. Adobe or Microsoft. Very different goals, and very different results
* *Efficiency vs. Personality.* While I don't necessarily think that we have to trade one for the other, in brewing and in software it often plays out that way. The funkiness and character in Jester King's beers don't develop as a direct result of inefficiency, and the lack of personality (taste, not marketing) of industrial beers is not the inevitable product of efficiency. But it seems to be the case in end, doesn't it? A drive for efficiency and economic value is a good thing in any financial venture, but a focus on it *to the exclusion of all else* does not yield good products. Period. Craft breweries tend towards the personal and opinionated nature of their products, and the big guys lean on efficient, repeatable industrial processes, and it's easy to see the results of each

My point is not to decry all things big, although admittedly that is my bias. Instead I want to ask, what aspects of the "craft" approach of independent software developers could large enterprise development shops take advantage of to improve their products, and the working environment of developers? Because, my guess is that the boom in craft brewing in this country holds some lessons for both independent and enterprise developers.
